readme.md, before:


# h-m-m (hackers mind map)

**h-m-m** (pronounced like the interjection "hmm") is a simple, fast, keyboard-centric terminal-based tool for working with mind maps. 

![screenshot](screenshot.png)


# Key bindings

Adding, removing, and editing nodes:

* `o` or `enter` - create a new sibling to the active node
* `O` or `tab` - create a new child for the active node
* `y` - yanks (copies) the active node and its descendants
* `Y` - yanks (copies) the descendants of the active node
* `d` - deletes (cuts) the active node and its descendants
* `D` - deletes (cuts) the descendants of the active node
* `p` - pastes as descendants of the active node
* `P` - pastes as siblings of the active node 
* `ctrl+p` - appends the clipboard text at the end of the active node's title
* `e`, `i`, or `a` - edits the active node
* `E`, `I`, or `A` - edits the active node, ignoring the existing text

Relative navigating and moving:

* `h` or `←` - activate the parent of the previously active node
* `l` or `→` - activate the middle child of the previously active node
* `j` or `↓` - activate the lower sibling (or the nearest lower node if there's no lower sibling)
* `k` or `↑` - activate the higher sibling (or the nearest higher node if there's no higher sibling)
* `J` - moves the current node down among its siblings
* `K` - moves the current node up among its siblings

Adjusting the view:

* `c` - centers the active node on the screen
* `C` - locks and always keeps active nodes on the center 
* `~` or `m` - activate the root element
* `g` - goes to the highest element
* `G` - goes to the lowest element
* `w` - increases the maximum node width
* `W` - decreases the maximum node width
* `z` - decreases line spacing
* `Z` - increases line spacing 

Collapsing and expanding:

* `space` - toggles the active node
* `v` - collapses everything other than the first-level nodes
* `b` - expands all nodes
* `1` to `9` - collapse the nth level and expand those before
* `f` - focuses by collapsing all, but the ancestors and descendants of the active node
* `F` - locks focus as the active node changes (try it with the center lock)
* `r` - collapses all the first level items except for the one that contains the active node
* `R` - collapses the children of the active node

Search:

* `/` - searches for a phrase
* `n` - goes to the next search result
* `N` - goes to the previous search result

Save, export, and quit:

* `s` - saves with the previous file name (or asks for one if there's none)
* `S` - saves with a new file name
* `x` - export as HTML
* `q` - quits (if the changes were already saved)
* `Q` - quits, ignoring the changes



# Configuration 

You can create an `h-m-m.conf` file in the same directory as the application and use it to change some or all of the following default values:

    max_parent_width = 25
    max_leaf_width = 55
    line_spacing = 1
    initial_depth = 1
    active_node_color = "\033[38;5;0m\033[48;5;172m\033[1m"
    message_color = "\033[38;5;0m\033[48;5;141m\033[1m"
    center_lock = false
    focus_lock = false

The colors are ASCII escape codes. 


# Data format

Mind maps are stored in plain text files (with `hmm` file extension by default) without metadata. The tree structure is represented by tab indentations; e.g., 

    root (level 0)
       item A (level 1)
       item B (level 1)
          item Ba (level 2)
          item Bb (level 2)
          item Bc (level 2)
             item BaX (level 3)
             item BaY (level 3)
          item Bd (level 2)
       item C (level 1)

When you yank (copy) or delete (cut) a subtree, the data will be put into your clipboard with a similar structure, and when pasting, the data will be interpreted as such. 

Most mind mapping applications use a similar format for copying and pasting. As a result, if you want to import a map from another application, you can probably select everything in that application, copy it, come to **h-m-m**, and paste it. The same usually works well when copying from HTML/PDF/Doc lists, spreadsheets (e.g., Calc and Excel), etc.


# Installing

**h-m-m** is a single php file. You can download it from here, or clone it on your computer using git and add a scheduled job to update it once a week. 

After downloading or cloning, you can run `php h-m-m` in your terminal to run the program with a blank map or `php h-m-m filename` to open an existing file. If you don't already have a php interpreter installed, you would need to install it as well. Note: You don't need to set up a "web server" to run it because it's not a web application, but rather a terminal application that works like those written in Python, Bash, etc. 
 
Optionally, you can make the file executable by running the `chmod +x h-m-m` in your terminal, and afterward, you can run it as `h-m-m filename` (assuming that **h-m-m** is in your path). 

In Linux, you need to have `xclip`, `xsel`, or `wl-clipboard` installed as well.

In Arch Linux, you can use the `h-m-m-git` AUR package to install it.


# Troubleshooting

If it doesn't work, you probably need to install `php7.2-mbstring` (e.g., `sudo apt install php7.2-mbstring` in Ubuntu). Replace `7.2` with the version of php installed on your system. Just in case, you can find the version number by running `php -v`.

In general, upgrading to a newer version of php would help as well; at least 7.4. 


# Compatibility 

I think the method I've used in this program to interact with the terminal emulator is general and standard enough to be cross-platform, but I've developed it in Linux and I don't have any other operating system to test it on. If you run into a problem in Windows or Mac, let me know, especially if you know how to fix it, and I'll try to make it work. 


# Feedback

Programming is not my career, but rather a hobby, and I developed **h-m-m** because I wanted to have something like this and couldn't find one. Therefore, what I've done here may have a lot of room for improvement. If you see an embarrassing problem in the program or have an idea for improvement, feel free to contact me; I'd be happy to receive your feedback.

Why php? It's simple: I only have a rusty knowledge of Pascal and a little familiarity with php. I thought about learning another language for this project (Haskell and Go were my top choices), but I didn't have time to do it. I'll probably do it later and convert it into a language I can compile :)

Commit message:

Instructions for installation script install.sh

readme.md, after:


# h-m-m (hackers mind map)

**h-m-m** (pronounced like the interjection "hmm") is a simple, fast, keyboard-centric terminal-based tool for working with mind maps. 

![screenshot](screenshot.png)


# Key bindings

Adding, removing, and editing nodes:

* `o` or `enter` - create a new sibling to the active node
* `O` or `tab` - create a new child for the active node
* `y` - yanks (copies) the active node and its descendants
* `Y` - yanks (copies) the descendants of the active node
* `d` - deletes (cuts) the active node and its descendants
* `D` - deletes (cuts) the descendants of the active node
* `p` - pastes as descendants of the active node
* `P` - pastes as siblings of the active node 
* `ctrl+p` - appends the clipboard text at the end of the active node's title
* `e`, `i`, or `a` - edits the active node
* `E`, `I`, or `A` - edits the active node, ignoring the existing text

Relative navigating and moving:

* `h` or `←` - activate the parent of the previously active node
* `l` or `→` - activate the middle child of the previously active node
* `j` or `↓` - activate the lower sibling (or the nearest lower node if there's no lower sibling)
* `k` or `↑` - activate the higher sibling (or the nearest higher node if there's no higher sibling)
* `J` - moves the current node down among its siblings
* `K` - moves the current node up among its siblings

Adjusting the view:

* `c` - centers the active node on the screen
* `C` - locks and always keeps active nodes on the center 
* `~` or `m` - activate the root element
* `g` - goes to the highest element
* `G` - goes to the lowest element
* `w` - increases the maximum node width
* `W` - decreases the maximum node width
* `z` - decreases line spacing
* `Z` - increases line spacing 

Collapsing and expanding:

* `space` - toggles the active node
* `v` - collapses everything other than the first-level nodes
* `b` - expands all nodes
* `1` to `9` - collapse the nth level and expand those before
* `f` - focuses by collapsing all, but the ancestors and descendants of the active node
* `F` - locks focus as the active node changes (try it with the center lock)
* `r` - collapses all the first level items except for the one that contains the active node
* `R` - collapses the children of the active node

Search:

* `/` - searches for a phrase
* `n` - goes to the next search result
* `N` - goes to the previous search result

Save, export, and quit:

* `s` - saves with the previous file name (or asks for one if there's none)
* `S` - saves with a new file name
* `x` - export as HTML
* `q` - quits (if the changes were already saved)
* `Q` - quits, ignoring the changes



# Configuration 

You can create an `h-m-m.conf` file in the same directory as the application and use it to change some or all of the following default values:

    max_parent_width = 25
    max_leaf_width = 55
    line_spacing = 1
    initial_depth = 1
    active_node_color = "\033[38;5;0m\033[48;5;172m\033[1m"
    message_color = "\033[38;5;0m\033[48;5;141m\033[1m"
    center_lock = false
    focus_lock = false

The colors are ASCII escape codes. 


# Data format

Mind maps are stored in plain text files (with `hmm` file extension by default) without metadata. The tree structure is represented by tab indentations; e.g., 

    root (level 0)
       item A (level 1)
       item B (level 1)
          item Ba (level 2)
          item Bb (level 2)
          item Bc (level 2)
             item BaX (level 3)
             item BaY (level 3)
          item Bd (level 2)
       item C (level 1)

When you yank (copy) or delete (cut) a subtree, the data will be put into your clipboard with a similar structure, and when pasting, the data will be interpreted as such. 

Most mind mapping applications use a similar format for copying and pasting. As a result, if you want to import a map from another application, you can probably select everything in that application, copy it, come to **h-m-m**, and paste it. The same usually works well when copying from HTML/PDF/Doc lists, spreadsheets (e.g., Calc and Excel), etc.


# Installing

**h-m-m** is a single php file. You can download it from here, or clone it on your computer using git and add a scheduled job to update it once a week. 

After downloading or cloning, you can run `php h-m-m` in your terminal to run the program with a blank map or `php h-m-m filename` to open an existing file. If you don't already have a php interpreter installed, you would need to install it as well. Note: You don't need to set up a "web server" to run it because it's not a web application, but rather a terminal application that works like those written in Python, Bash, etc. 
 
Optionally, you can make the file executable by running the `chmod +x h-m-m` in your terminal, and afterward, you can run it as `h-m-m filename` (assuming that **h-m-m** is in your path). 

In Linux, you need to have `xclip`, `xsel`, or `wl-clipboard` installed as well.

In Arch Linux, you can use the `h-m-m-git` AUR package to install it.

## Installation script for Linux

[Download](https://github.com/nadrad/h-m-m/archive/refs/heads/main.zip) or clone this repository and execute the `install.sh` (run as normal user. Sudo password will be asked if necessary).

The installer will copy `h-m-m` to `/usr/local/bin` and make it executable, so after install you just need to type `h-m-m` from anywhere to use it.


# Troubleshooting

If it doesn't work, you probably need to install `php7.2-mbstring` (e.g., `sudo apt install php7.2-mbstring` in Ubuntu). Replace `7.2` with the version of php installed on your system. Just in case, you can find the version number by running `php -v`.

In general, upgrading to a newer version of php would help as well; at least 7.4. 


# Compatibility 

I think the method I've used in this program to interact with the terminal emulator is general and standard enough to be cross-platform, but I've developed it in Linux and I don't have any other operating system to test it on. If you run into a problem in Windows or Mac, let me know, especially if you know how to fix it, and I'll try to make it work. 


# Feedback

Programming is not my career, but rather a hobby, and I developed **h-m-m** because I wanted to have something like this and couldn't find one. Therefore, what I've done here may have a lot of room for improvement. If you see an embarrassing problem in the program or have an idea for improvement, feel free to contact me; I'd be happy to receive your feedback.

Why php? It's simple: I only have a rusty knowledge of Pascal and a little familiarity with php. I thought about learning another language for this project (Haskell and Go were my top choices), but I didn't have time to do it. I'll probably do it later and convert it into a language I can compile :)
